What is a longitudinal data representation?
Another way to view it is the patient history representation.
Is basically a way to aggregate all of the visits,
encounters the patient may have in the healthcare system.
Of course, having all this information is
an ideal state to best analyze and diagnose correctly.
But the reality is that patient records don't
always come so cleanly organized and aggregate correctly,
which is what happens with real-world data sets.
Anyhow, let's take a view at what this looks like to better understand.
Let's take an example with patient A.
You can see what an individual encounter might encompass with
a single visit being usually a diagnosis and some procedure,
medication, and their lab test.
Combining patients together into a data set and finding a way to
aggregate and represent the visits across the patient are the key here.
We'll go over some of the benefits and challenges of this soon.
So let's take a scenario where you train this great model A and it has fantastic results.
They're super excited about this.
But the data used for this model had an implicit assumption that you are unaware of,
that only the label for the last encounter for patient history would be included.
Even after finding this out,
you thought that this won't make a difference
because you can always transform the data and production.
Now the reality is that what we have put into
production is not working well and things start going haywire.
You're not getting the same results that you
anticipated from what you had seen when you trained your model.
Even with some cross-validation in other augmentation methods,
you still see significant model drift.
After some analysis of the production data pipeline,
you find out that the production use case has an encounter selected at random from
the patient history and information has been duplicated
by accident because of information not being leveled right.
As mentioned earlier, there are some challenges with building
a data representation and more preparation and validation is required.
While there is movement towards using longitudinal representation,
it's still not common.
However, there are significant benefits to using a longitudinal representation as
it allows us to use a full patient history and this can show changes in state over time.
In the next slide,
we will see how Google is using
this representation to extract significant signal from EHR records.
To further illustrate the importance of having
a strong EHR longitudinal data representation,
you can look at the paper Google published in Nature in 2018,
that came up with their own representation built off of
a Fast Healthcare Interoperability Resources or FHIR standards.
This paper highlighted the aforementioned challenges
with building a longitudinal representation.
For the 216,000 plus patients in the data set they use,
this was extrapolated out to 46 billion data points.
You can see how this can become a challenge with scaling this further
with either more patients or other types of data like genomic data,
clinical trial data, etc.
As most practitioners know,
the data preparation stage is one of the most time-consuming,
but also impactful parts of a data science project.
The paper stated that this representation allow them to use deep learning models,
which outperform clinically used traditional predictive models in all cases.
This is important to note since the healthcare industry has just started to consider
deep learning and still barriers exist for
using them due to concerns about interpretability.
Lastly, to illustrate the value that this representation has,
you can also find that Google has pathed this approach,
and we have put this link in the classroom notes.
Feel free to take a look at this before the next part.